In the last couple of lectures, you learned how you can use port security to prevent unauthorized devices
like wireless access points and switches on your network. In this lecture, you'll learn how you can
use port security to lock interfaces down to a particular host based on its MAC address.
Before we get to that, this works in conjunction with the maximum MAC addresses setting of port security.
When you enable port security on an interface, this default to one. So a maximum of one MAC address
is allowed to send traffic into the port.
You can increase that if you need to.
If multiple hosts share that one physical port. For example, if you've got an IP phone plugged in there
with a PC plugged in the back of the IP phone, and both the phone and the PC, need to use that
one physical port on the switch. To do that,
go to the interface. In our example, interface  fa0/2, switchport port-security maximum 2.
It will never allow 2 MAC addresses to send traffic into that port.
To verify this, the same command as usual, show port-security interface fa0/2, and
it shows you the difference between the maximum MAC address and the total MAC address output that you see here.
Maximum MAC addresses is the total that is allowed to send traffic into the port. Total MAC addresses is how
many are currently detected on the port.
So here, we've allowed two but it's only discovered one MAC address so far.
OK, so let's talk about how to lock the port down to particular hosts based on their MAC address.
We can manually add the MAC address that is allowed on a particular port. To do that,
the configuration here, we've said interface fa0/10, switchport port-security to enable
port security, switchport port-security mac address 1111.2222.3333
for the example.
And then switchport port-security maximum 1.
Once we've done this, it's only that one MAC address that is allowed to send traffic into this port. If any
other MAC address tries to send traffic in,
it's going to get blocked and it will take the violation action, which by default is to shutdown the
port.
But let's look at another scenario. So the reason you would do this would be a highly secured environment.
Let's say it's a bank. But let's say for this example, that it's the headquarters and there are
1000 PCs there.
So we've currently got those 1000 PCs which are authorized hosts already connected to the network,
and we want to lock it down.
It's only those PCs that are allowed on the network and only on the ports that they're already connected
to.
Well, obviously, it wouldn't be scalable for us to find out if its 1000 MAC addresses and
then go and configure all the switches locking that one MAC address down to that one particular port.
That just isn't really feasible from an administrative point of view.
But thankfully, there's an easy way that we can get the same effect and not by using sticky MAC addresses.
Sticky MAC addresses add the learned MAC address to the running configuration. So you saw already from the
earlier lessons that when a host starts transmitting on the port,
the switch will learn the MAC address. With sticky MAC addresses,
it can learn the MAC address that is already connected to the port.
When it does this, it adds that the MAC address to the running configuration, associating it with
the port for port security.
You can then save that to startup config and that will make it permanent.
So that locks the port down to the PC that is currently plugged in the port without you having it manually
specify what the MAC address is. The configuration to do this, interface fa0/2,
switchport port-security,
and then switchport port-security mac-address sticky.
Now there is a lot of confusion with this and people get confused between what's the difference between
when I say MAC address sticky and when I just don't mention the MAC address. I'll show you that when
we do the lab demo and it's going to make it clear.
OK, once we've configured this to verify the MAC addresses that are associated with the different
interfaces, you can just show port-security address. Here,
I can see on fa0/2 there's a MAC address that was dynamically configured.
So this was automatically learned.
The same with the MAC address on fa0/3.
The MAC address on fa0/10,
I can see secure configured.
It was manually added, the MAC address 1.2.3.
That's how you can check the MAC addresses associated with your different interfaces for port security.
And finally, we can also put in a command to view a summary of all the ports on the switch.
This is useful if you want to see if any ports have been shutdown because they're violating - all in one output with
a single command. To do that, it is show port-security.
OK, so that was the theory and also the command examples of how to configure port security to lock
your ports down to particular hosts. In the next lecture,
I'll show you how to configure this as well.
And like I said, it's going to clear up any confusion you had about having no MAC
address specified, having a manually set MAC address or using the sticky addresses.
See you in the next lecture.